The beta test for World War II was a
Spanish Civil War, and in a sense the
beta test for the new world of warfare
is Ukraine. And now we've seen it played
out in the Gulf with with what Iran
does. And I think it it introduces a
sense of risk that
wasn't there before. I remember I was in
Kuwait at in January when they were
announcing new policy for
investment, international investment in
their oil and gas industry. And it felt
very optimistic time. It felt, you know,
and you had that excitement, you know,
really the optimism around in Dubai and
Abu Dhabi,
the Vision 2030 in Saudi Arabia. Well,
it's it's it's not going to be as
optimistic now. And I think there is
going to be deeper thought about energy
security and diversification
and what kind of security premium, and
by the way, also that you need to spend
more money, more share of your sovereign
wealth fund on on defense.
So, I think all of those changes, I
mean, it it, you know, we don't know
what the full outline of this settlement
is, if it is a settlement, but we do
know that it is going to be a different
world than the one that existed before
before the war began.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe,
in the Odd Lots tradition of spring of
2026, I'm going to start this podcast by
saying that we are recording on April
17th at 1:00 p.m. 1:01 p.m. Yes.
And of course, the reason we have to
specify dates is because this is yet
another episode about commodities, oil,
the war in Iran, and so forth. And we've
already had multiple mixed headlines
today, but by and large, even with the
mixed headlines, and again, who knows
what's going to happen there, but you
know, the market is moving past the
acute phase of the war pretty clearly.
Possibly. Possibly.
>> Right now, the market is moving past it.
>> Oh, the market the market is certainly
interpreting this as moving past. Yes,
absolutely. But again, things are very
fluid. They can always change on a dime,
which they have been. I'm convinced that
one day in early 2026, we'll be able to
record one of these energy-related
episodes without saying exactly what
time and date it is, but not yet. Uh
however, I think that no matter what
happens with the status of the
ceasefire, it seems very clear that what
we've just experienced has been
I'm not even sure if you could say a
wake-up call, but certainly an acute
phenomenon that is being interpreted
very differently by different players in
the world.
>> Yeah. I would say three things that
regardless of how this ultimately
resolves itself are on my mind right
now. And And they all relate to past
episodes. So, of course, we did that
episode with Bob Brackett. We talked
about it.
>> Okay, this is going to perhaps going to
be a change in global LNG gas flows,
maybe to the benefit of
to the benefit of American producers of
LNG, depending on how much that can be
expanded. We did that episode with Alex
Turnbull, who said in East Asia, there's
going to be an appetite for restarting
more nuclear plants. And also, we've
seen this surge in EV buying there. So,
already a change in East Asia. And then
I'm thinking back to
our This was before the war, but our
most recent conversation with Jeff
Currie, who talked about the sort of the
story of global commodity hoarding. And
this being like a sort of real post-2020
story and generally. And so, wondering
whether this will accelerate structural
shifts towards more resource
nationalism, etc. Resource guarding.
Yeah, I mean
whatever you can say about the current
environment, one thing seems very
certain, which is if you compare where
we are now to say, I don't you
or 2019 before the pandemic, It just
feels so different. If you think about
that energy environment, it was all
about, you know, cheap US shale. It was
about um lots of money flowing into
green energy and ESG and aiding the
energy transition. Russian gas was going
to power Europe for pretty much forever.
Um and now we are just in a very
different world. So, the long-term
trajectory of the energy
layout, let's put it that way, seems to
have an alter like no matter what
happens immediately with Iran. And who
do we call when we want to talk about
longer-term structural changes in global
energy markets?
>> Only one name. I'm very happy to say
that we do in fact have the perfect
guest. Again, uh he's coming back on the
podcast. Daniel Yergin, he is of course
vice chairman of S&P Global. He's the
author of The Prize, The Epic Quest for
Oil, Money, and Power. Basically, the
book on oil history. As well as the new
book, The New Map, Energy, Climate, and
The Clash of Nations. So, Dan, thank you
very much for coming back on the
podcast. Really appreciate it. Well,
thank you. And as you said, it it could
not be more timely, but uh is it things
do change very quickly. Yes. [laughter]
Okay, the caveat is right up front. But,
I guess if we go back to early March, I
would just love to get a sense of what
you were thinking as you saw some of
these headlines about the Strait of
Hormuz being closed. Because for anyone
who's who's read the book, I mean, the
closure of the Strait of Hormuz is
basically kind of the nightmare scenario
which has been looming in a lot of
energy analysts' minds for a very long
time. And here you were seeing it
actually happen. What was going through
your head?
Well, it was in fact [clears throat] a
nightmare scenario that had been in not
only for energy, but for strategic
planners for decades had happened. I
think it's one of those things that
people
looked at as a scenario, but thought it
would never happen. But then it happened
and it does change the world and it
changed the way people think about
energy. Uh we've had supply chain
shocks, but this was the mother of all
supply chain shocks in terms of the
closure of the Strait of Hormuz. Look,
if if the ceasefire is durable and the
Strait opens up in short period of short
period of time and we're like, "Okay, it
made sense that oil prices surged but
didn't go to say $200 plus because it in
you know, we'll be able in retrospect it
turned out to be a short war, we had
buffer stocks, etc." Nonetheless, I
think like in the middle of March there
was a lot there was this feeling that
something is weird because you have the
mother of all supply shocks and what's
like and the aunt of all
what's it like the aunt of like what's
like Oh, oh you mean I thought you meant
the actual insects and aunts.
>> of all supply shocks and then the aunt
of all like price spikes. I'm trying to
say like second cousin removed of all
price spikes.
>> I mean it was like it was it was
Remember we had two different prices
going at the same time. We had the the
Brent the futures price which was always
saying, "Well, this is going to end and
prices are going to come down." And then
there was the dated Brent the near term
which said, "We are having a major
dislocation and prices are really going
up and we've never seen that dislocation
on that scale before." It was like two
different visions of the world almost.
>> why don't you I've read like 10
explainers on some of these gaps between
the front month price and the the dated
Brent or the quote physical price etc.
But what was it how were you at the time
thinking about this gap? Was it as
simple as the market simply does not
believe that the Well, I I did think
that there was a difference there was a
difference between how the financial
markets which were processing things
like statements by the president,
statements from Iran and so forth
looking at the future and the way the
physical market, the industry market,
and at CERAWeek, I remember one of the
CEOs said in one of the dialogues
that risk has been underpriced in the
market because I think from the industry
point of view they saw there there are
major dislocations and those
dislocations are playing out unevenly
across the world. Asia hit the hardest,
Europe feeling it,
and then the US mainly seen it in terms
of rising prices at the gasoline pump,
but no problem getting supplies. But in
Asia, a big problem getting supplies.
So, I'm glad you mentioned CERAWeek and
this is also one of the reasons we
wanted to talk to you. So, CERAWeek,
which is the sort of annual energy
industry gathering in Houston, right?
Every year.
That took place in sort of mid to late
March, smack dab in the middle of all of
these very changing headlines, which
we've been discussing. What was the mood
like over there when you were talking
to, you know, actual participants in the
market?
I think in terms of actual participants
in the market, particularly, you know,
the the CEOs of the companies on the
interviews that I did on stage platform,
they were all
feeling that there is a real
dislocation, a real scramble. They're
worried about getting their employees to
safety,
worried about the safety of their
colleagues, their facilities, and then
just how these markets are going to be
supplied and
what would be the demand destruction,
what would happen to price. So, they
were very concerned with the logistics
of, you know, of having lost the biggest
supply of oil that had ever happened in
history.
And by the way, it was not oil oil, but
also natural gas, which
focused on because I think there is less
awareness of how significant it was in
terms of LNG. And then I think the
eye-opener that maybe all these
scenarios that people had been doing for
the years about the closure of the
Strait of Hormuz, people not thought
about fertilizer, they not thought about
petrochemicals, then I thought about
sulfur, then I thought about helium,
which the semiconductor industry in
Taiwan desperately needs. And so
actually what one of the other things
that came out of this was the
recognition of how the Gulf countries,
Saudi Arabia, have become much more
integrated into the world economy. And
by the way, they were also exporters of
one other extremely valuable commodity
called money with the size the size of
their you know, their reserves. Well,
I'm glad you just listed a bunch of all
thoughts episodes. So it's basically So
I feel like we've ticked each of those
boxes in separate episodes, including,
you know, Gulf capital. So that's good.
But just going back to Joe's question,
like do you have a framework in your
mind to explain why the physical market
and the actual CEOs of energy companies
are freaking out versus what's going on
with the futures price or was going on
with the Well, yeah, well well, I think
it's because the futures price is
responding to so many forces there. And
you know, people investing in futures, a
lot of them they don't have to worry
about supplying a
you know, a customer. They don't have to
worry about how do we get jet fuel to
ensure that the airplanes keep flying.
And as you know, in Asia, flights have
been canceled. In India, it you know,
restaurants were closed because they use
LPG for cooking and they didn't have
enough cooking
LPG for that. So for Asia, it was a real
shortage situation. And I think that's
what if you have a global perspective,
that's what you were coping with. In the
United States, you know, one difference
between this and a previous energy
crisis, the famous energy crisis of the
past I've written about in my in the
prize and the new map and so forth, is
the position of the United States so
dramatically changed. And that has been
a huge buffer for for consumers in this
country and for the economy. Had it not
been for the war, how much would a Seer
week in 2026
have been dominated by conversations
about powering AI data centers and so
forth. How much would that have been the
story had it not been for the war in
Iran? It was anyway. We had the you
know, we had the president of Google,
the president of Microsoft there. We had
people from Nvidia, from
from other chip manufacturers.
It was a real change. The focus was, you
know, the tech industry meets the energy
industry and how do we get along and
kind of this panic about
do we have enough electricity
particularly in the United States? And I
would have said it then that energy
security had shifted to from oil and gas
to electricity. But of course with this
crisis it was backed up also it was
about oil and gas. But that was you
know, the big discussion that ran
through it and about particularly the
role of natural gas because on the one
hand the US has built up this big LNG
industry which is
plays a much bigger role in our economy
than people recognize. I mean
our latest numbers are 75% of the
valuable semiconductor exports is
represented by LNG. You know, twice the
value of of all Hollywood and television
and entertainment exports. But now
natural gas is coming back into
it's already the significant but more
significant for electric generation and
what a change from the Biden
administration which wanted to have
hydrocarbons out of electric generation
by 2035.
So there's so this question of how do we
what are the supply chains to assure
electricity to support this AI boom
which is represents in the United States
about half of GDP growth.
So what were people saying on that
front? So you know, we've had episodes
of the show where we've talked about
maybe overcapacity when it comes to
building out energy for data centers.
There are still plenty of people out
there who think that
the energy demands are just going to be
so enormous that we're always going to
be playing catch up. There's a debate
over who should bear responsibility for
building out that new energy supply. So,
should it be the tech companies
themselves or, you know, someone else
given it's a strategic technology? What
are you hearing on the ground? Uh I
think the tech companies are going to be
a much bigger players in electricity
than they would have been in the in the
past. I remember again the CEO of one of
the the president of one of those
companies said in 2008 when they built
their first data center, they didn't
talk about electricity. They didn't
worry about electricity. So, it's been a
huge learning and as as one of them
said, we've had to learn to talk to the
to the power industry. Uh you know, a
software engineer maybe I don't know
what's a month or two of work to do
software. Uh it's seven or eight or 10
years to for an energy company for an
engineer to get a project done. And it's
that that's the the gulf between the two
of them. And the sense that there is a
race and it's, you know, it's always
said it's the US-China race, but it's
also a race very definitely among
companies
uh to build capacity. Now, one question
I think you were getting at is that the
sense that there is the contrarian view
that chips will become more efficient
and maybe electricity demand will not be
as great as it is, but at this point
every time, you know, you talk to a
uh
you know, a utility executive, they say
and we heard this at CERAWeek, you know,
when they had years and years of no
growth or very flat growth in demand,
they'll say this year it's going to grow
5% or it's going to grow 8%
uh and uh there are only so many
electricians, there are only so many
transformers. So, again, those supply
chains are uh very important there, too.
How much um
do you expect to be truly internalized
or vertically integrated within the tech
industry when it comes to energy? We see
headlines from here and there like, you
know, like Google will make an
investment in a small modular reactor
startup, but you never really know how
like serious that is or
and from time to time it was like, "Oh,
Meta hired an energy trader and this is
new and this is different, etc." How
much do you actually anticipate like
what what do you think that the big tech
companies are ultimately going to
internalize as we need to have this be
as part of our core competency rather
than we're going to work with some
third-party partner on this? We can see
that they've hired people who come out
of the energy industry either from the
oil and gas industry or or
in electric power industry. So, they've
built building up the capacity
to do that and their investment show it.
You mentioned
you know, one company but look at
Amazon, they've invested in X-energy
which is a
small modular reactor company and I
think the idea is that and I hear from
other of these tech companies too, we'll
invest in them and help drive down the
cost and see them as part of the way of
meeting the electricity demand and I
think I know I've you know, made I wrote
down as you said the themes that you
would talked about on nuclear.
This is I mean this crisis is a boost to
nuclear but I think AI has been a big
boost to nuclear
in terms of
the the sense among tech companies that
nuclear has to be part of the picture
and uh just this morning I was talking
with the head of one of the largest
government funds and you know, they're
invested you know, not a non-US fund and
they're invested in
in
in fusion. So, you know, it's it's a
different you know, there's just a
different attitude towards nuclear and I
think the needs of the tech companies is
one of the things that's really driven
that.
Well, actually on this note, I wanted to
ask you about renewables and you know,
the green energy transition and all of
that. It feels like in some parts of the
world, recent events in the Gulf have
maybe uh hastened some of that
transition. Although, I can't even call
it a transition because as we discussed
with Alex Turnbull, it's like yes,
people are buying a bunch more EVs, but
those EVs are going to be powered by
coal for, you know, the foreseeable
future cuz there's an energy shortage.
What exactly is going on with renewables
now? Is are people still seeing that as
a substitute for traditional energy or
is this more of a an addition to
bolster, I guess, diversification? Well,
first we have to note that um
over 90% of the new electric capacity
worldwide that was installed last year
was wind and solar. So, it is uh a
growing business.
Uh secondly, like I've heard of an
example of a project in in Vietnam that
was going to be done with LNG, they're
buying solar panels. I think that uh
wind and solar gain
uh
less about climate now uh and more about
part of diversification, part of energy
security. So, I think that dialogue uh
that has changed maybe and certainly
we'll hear it in Europe and we'll I hear
it at least not from everybody, but from
uh people in the United States as well.
So, it's a different way of looking at
wind and solar as a way to be more
independent, more secure, more
diversified. Doesn't answer the question
of how you power an airplane or the fact
that uh only about 6% of the new cars
being sold in the US today, even with
this crisis, are EVs. It's pretty crazy
how little EVs have taken off. Yeah. You
know, here's something I think about
like in the US, we are obviously our
lands are blessed with uh commodities
including abundant oil and gas,
especially since we've gotten really
good and high-tech at sideways drilling
and all of these things like that. Could
it be a curse in the sense that, you
know, the world is going to electrify.
One day, maybe not in our lifetimes, but
one day there will probably be electric
airplanes, right? Batteries will
eventually get good enough and airplanes
will no longer need jet fuel, etc. Is
the Is part of the story that the US is
going to stay on this path of the
internal combustion engine and so forth
in part because we are just so blessed
with um
fossil fuels? I think I'm just
reflecting on that. I think that's
part of it. It's part of what consumers
want and just I think that the notion
that there would be this big pickup in
electric cars
uh hasn't occurred here. In Europe, I
think it's about 20%. Then you go to
China and of course it's much higher
because uh not only
at the price point, but also government
policies of all kinds. You know, you
don't You're not going to get a license
for a new car in Beijing unless it's an
electric car. But but here's some
numbers that may not be clear. I mean,
we were looking at this when we were
doing our copper study because electric
cars use almost three times as much
copper as a conventional car. And it
turns out that in uh 2025,
about 23 million 22 23 million electric
cars were sold worldwide compared to the
entire US new car market of 16 17
million uh new cars. So you see that um
it's happened worldwide. Now, a big
portion of of them are in China, but
China is also really, you know, they
they have reoriented their exports much
more to outside of the United States and
even Europe uh to the developing world
and they're going to really be pushing
their electric cars. But of course, you
do need need reliable electricity
supplies if you're going to have uh
penetration of electric cars. I just
want to go back to the um situation in
the Strait of Hormuz directly for a few
minutes. So you mentioned at the outro
that or you mentioned initially that
this was something that people thought
would never happen because the stakes
were so high. If you If Iran
>> Yeah, let me jump in. Let me jump in.
Yeah. They would do scenarios about it,
but assume that all these things could
happen, but
>> that Right. So, I mean, this is the
surprising thing. Like, it actually
happened despite the stakes being so
high and, you know, despite the world
relying on the strait for 20% of its oil
and gas,
what's your take on like what why this
particular moment? Like, what are the
conditions that allowed the closure of
the Strait of Hormuz? Well, I think it
was the war. Here's a war in which
the United States, the mightiest
military, was at war with a country as
somebody I heard somebody remark the
other day half the GDP of Belgium, but
with a lot of missiles and a lot of
drones and kind of leading to a standoff
and it was a moment for
Iran to pounce even though the very
senior leadership was destroyed right at
the beginning of the war.
Clearly, they had decentralized. This
was a war When you look at the amount of
drones and missiles they had and they
continue to have, this is a war that
they'd prepared for for a long time, the
struggle with the United States, and
they seized the moment to
And I, you know, maybe it was it's the
advent of drones that was able for them
to pull off saying that the we control
the strait and when you send your ship
through the strait, you'll follow the
route that we tell you. And by the way,
it's actually a canal and you're going
to pay a toll and the toll's going to go
to the IRGC.
Maybe it was it was the capability of
drones that enabled that.
>> Let's say the strait reopens,
but as you mentioned, you know, all
cheap drones, the Shaheed drone may may
be enough and Iran will has a lot of
them and they'll probably keep producing
a lot of them. Maybe that is enough to
close the strait even against the
mightiest military in the world.
Does that permanently change how the
world thinks about energy security. We
see that because they were capable of
doing this, that we therefore we know it
could happen again, right? We know it
could happen down the future. And does
that change energy planning? Yeah, I was
thinking, you know, the beta test for
World War was a Spanish Civil War. And
in a sense the beta test for the new
world of warfare is Ukraine. And now
we've seen it played out in the Gulf
with with what Iran does. And I think it
it introduces a sense of risks that
wasn't there before. I remember I was in
Kuwait at in January when they were
announcing new policy for
investment, international investment in
their oil and gas industry. And it felt
very optimistic time. It felt, you know,
and you had that excitement, you know,
really the optimism around in Dubai and
Abu Dhabi,
the Vision 2030 in Saudi Arabia. Well,
it's it's it's not going to be as
optimistic now. And I I think there is
going to be deeper thought about
energy security and diversification.
And what kind of security premium, and
by the way, also that you need to spend
more money, more share of your sovereign
wealth fund on on defense. So, I think
all of those changes, I mean, it it you
know, we don't know what the full
outline of this settlement is, if it is
a settlement. But we do know that it is
going to be a different world than the
one that existed before
before the war began. In what sense
would this particular eventuality like
change oil routes and markets? But if
the if the US maintains some sort of
control or input in the straight,
collecting a toll, maybe alongside Iran,
you know, at one point I think Trump was
talking about this being on the table.
How would that change global oil flows
if you had a sort of like US involvement
in that particular area?
Well, that would be um a pretty dramatic
expansion of uh authority of the US. I
mean, some have talked about a
international authority which would be
composed of Iran, Oman, and the UAE,
which are the three countries that
border the uh the strait, that some sort
of international system. But, I I think
also that for the Gulf countries, for
Saudi Arabia, it I don't think it's
tolerable for them to be paying a toll
to Iran and having Iran have that, you
know, domination over supplies and
having those funds that they pay go to
the IRGC, which apparently is uh what
would be the destiny of those funds. So,
that I think there's things here that
are just unresolved. And uh
obviously, at the top of that list is is
the strait, along with uh what Iran is
or is not going to do in terms of
nuclear weapons.
Um I'm glad that you said it's going to
be a different world regardless after
the war because thank you for giving us
the headline that we're going to use to
run this episode. Always nice to get a
nice uh clean phrase like that. But,
what else, you know, again, what else
could we see in this different world?
Maybe from the you mentioned how the
Gulf regions would react or maybe
completely find it unacceptable for Iran
to take that toll. But, what else do you
see as some of the potential fallouts in
this different world after what we've
seen? I like the way you put a beta test
to it. I mean, the Ukraine may have been
a beta test for this. This
I don't want to be dark, but we've see
we see the incredible power of drones
here. What else do countries do for
their own energy security in this
different world?
Well, one is drone capacity. And, you
know, a year ago we heard that we were
Ukraine was told they had no cards. It
turns out they do have cards, which is
their No country is more experienced in
terms of dealing with drones. and there
is the president of uh
of Ukraine in the Gulf doing drone deals
with those countries uh to give them
protection. I think there other
consequences, too. I think that the
I guess we'll we'll call this the Hormuz
crisis. Like sounds like the Suez
crisis, the Hormuz crisis.
>> That works. Uh but I think it uh
I think it's also accentuates and really
a crisis for NATO.
Uh which really began with, of course,
well, it's has years in the making, but
over Greenland. And you know, now you
have the Europeans talking about a a
NATO without the United States. And so,
I think the relationship there's been
less focus on that, but I think that's
one of the uh the lasting
questions that come out of this, too. I
mean, you know, one thing that you don't
think about unless it's not there is
trust. And uh trust has been eroded,
things have become more transactional.
And yet, to solve really to deal with
uh global energy issues, you need kind
of global cooperation. That was the very
fundamental idea that led to the
establishment of the International
Energy Agency as a way to coordinate so
that you don't have sort of bruising
competition uh among countries. Mhm. If
I could ask you to put your um sort of
macro hat on for a second, if I think
about the current world, you know, it
seems like one where people are going to
be more focused on energy security,
maybe they're going to be building out
their own production capacity, their own
stockpiles of oil,
they're probably going to be increasing
their defense budgets. Uh maybe it's
also a world where smaller powers,
because of drones, are able to mount,
you know, their own offensive campaigns
and sort of hold the line and create
their own choke points um
in different geographies. When I think
about that world,
it strikes me as an inherently
inflationary. Does that seem to be the
case for you? Like, is there a new term
premium that like comes about I guess
because of everything that we've just
seen in the Gulf? I think you're
absolutely right. I think it really
began, you know, what what drove the the
that incredible development of
of supply chains so complicated I
remember looking at one for automobile
parts that looked like a bowl of
spaghetti was the fact that it drove
down costs. It was all about efficiency
and increasingly security predictability
reliability resilience has come to the
fore in it and I think as you describe
that is going to be even more true
today. So spending more money on defense
and
trying to localize production build
security and that's inherently adds cost
that we're not there. It's reversing
a trend that had been decades in the
making. So I think that that builds it
in.
I'm curious you know, obviously the AI
industry needs the energy industry or
needs energy expertise
and so either will be working more
closely in partnership with companies.
It'll bring some of it in house. When
you're down in Houston, do you hear
anything about the reverse in terms of
how AI is going to change the change
energy in terms of the usage of
artificial intelligence or robots in in
terms in terms of production and mining
and all that? Well, absolutely.
Certainly we had a big mining track
there and
I don't know do you what's what's the
noun for using robots but
more that now robots by the way are also
copper intensive which which is a you
know, goes back to this whole question
about this kind of potential gap in
copper supplies that you need for
electrification. Again, supply chains
back in back on the table in a different
version. But of course the the question
there is what does it do to jobs?
What does it do to efficiency? And I
think every CEO was was talking about
how we're applying AI in all these
different cases in our in our companies.
And probably um
there's the same anxiety about jobs
there
with the future of work will be that you
see a generally reflected and we'll
probably hear more about as we go into
the November midterm elections. You
know, there's a part in Land Man where
they're at a they're at an oil they're
at an oil industry
gathering or something and they see a
robot. There's one of the one of the
providers is there showing it's like you
can replace some of your workers with
robots. But also as a to Daniel's point,
um after we build humanoid robots,
probably the first thing that will
they'll be used for is to go into the
copper mines so that they can reproduce
themselves and then build more robot.
You know, that would be the
>> even think they have to be humanoids to
do that, but I I believe that's the
movie script that you're working on
right now.
>> [laughter]
>> See, the thing is, Joe, if you keep
talking about Land Man, I'm never going
to watch it cuz I'll feel like
like I know all about it already.
>> a real thing. It makes sense though like
saying I that part but like yeah, like
it there's it's going to be all about
the copper to keep building robots for
national security. So I I think I see
your movie with the
robots [clears throat] go down there and
they're reproducing themselves and
>> They got to get that copper and so that
they can make more robots. Yeah.
I think there's one other thing that's
important to talk about which is uh
what you know, assuming that we are
going to go into a stabilization and a
more you know, and war ceasefire etc.
How long does it take to actually
recover from this?
And I think this goes back to Tracy to
your calls to about
your comments about inflation. This is
not something that's solved overnight
and at least
it will take probably if peace breaks
out, you know, maybe a couple of months
before the oil markets are back in in
position cuz remember the last tankers
had already left and it had docked from
before the war. Inventories have been
run down. So, and the captains have to
be sure and their crews have to be
willing to go through
the Gulf and so it it's a couple months
before the oil market starts to get, you
know, get back into balance. And then I
know one of the CEOs
said that if you look at the overall
disruption including petrochemicals and
everything and the destruction of
refineries, it might be as much as 2/3
of a year before things are really
cleared up and back to normal. So, it
isn't there's no light switch here and
so that will be reflected in prices.
Yeah.
So, just going back to AI and
electrification for a minute. I
mentioned in the intro that one of the
things that's different to today is uh
the almost complete absence of ESG
investing in today's world. So, we used
to hear so much about it pre-2020
and I got the sense, you know, maybe
this was a bit of advertising, but you
certainly got the sense there was a lot
of money flowing into ESG funds
for green energy or socially beneficial
programs or whatever.
You do not get that sense today at all.
Is there a possibility though that ESG
sort of gets rebranded either under an
energy security umbrella or under a sort
of AI electrification umbrella and we
start to see capital flow into it in a
meaningful way yet again? I think that's
a very reasonable expectation and I
think we'll see even the tech companies
still have their net zero objectives.
So, they may be using gas, but then
they'll be looking to invest in in
renewables as well to show that they're
net zero. So,
you know, we've one of the things that
we've got to get used to in the United
States is to have these 180° swings from
one administration to another, but one
way that people kind of investing in
energy but still maybe have
ESG in the back of their mind or
concerned about it, you you rebranded as
infrastructure. And then you're not
investing in energy, you're investing in
infrastructure and infrastructure is
generally considered very good thing to
invest in
as long as you get a return. We
mentioned some of these big
mega trends that the war has brought to
light including obviously the resource
nationalism etc.
Is the potential for US LNG exports, is
that tapped out? Like are we already
going as fast as we can to build out
that capacity or plausibly could it even
is there an even further a higher gear
that that could go into? Oh, there is
much additional capacity in in process.
Qatar has a very big expansion but
planned but we'll see the US coming on
with it.
If we had been having this call, you
know, if in we're in January of course
and looking out on 2026 the big concern
would be is the is there going to be too
much LNG capacity and market but there
is but there is a concern too about
demand destruction. Will people feel as
confident about it? Will they have you
know, in Southeast Asia have gone back
to coal or will they push in other
directions renewables? But I think still
we're expect you know, roughly that by
2040 the LNG market could be 50% bigger
than it is but of course that market has
to be there and it has to be at a price
that people are are willing to you know,
pay and confident. And it also means I
think countries and this is a question
there are a lot of Europeans at CERAWeek
who were there about tying up US LNG
supplies
long-term and wanting to have those
supplies but you know, there's always a
question of
you know, wanting to be sure that the US
is a reliable provider and you're not
going to see something like the Biden
administration where they put a freeze
on LNG, but US US LNG is you know, by
far the large the largest supplier now
and with part of Qatar really damaged at
least for a few years out of
it will be even more reliance on US LNG.
And I have another question. So, the US
is this is just such an energy
powerhouse now with both respect to oil
and gas obviously and we're next oil you
know, we're oil independent although I
know it's these things are technical
because of refining capacity and so
forth, but we're an oil powerhouse too.
I'm just sort of curious however, like
costs in the oil field are rising.
Is US oil self-sufficiency
a guaranteed thing for decades to come
or would it be possible like with shale
decline rates and rising domestic costs
etc. That the US ever like sort of
returns to I don't know, what it looked
like in the 90s or something like that.
Like how guaranteed is our oil security
just because we've had these sort of 20
really good years?
>> Well, I wouldn't you never want to say
anything is for sure forever because
things really do change and even I think
tracing your remarks at the beginning
about how the world looked in 2019 and
here 7 years later the world looks very
different. So, many changes could
happen. I think there's been a general
view and this you know, there was a
debate really at CERAWeek among the CEOs
about shale that question. Some saying
well, it's plateaued or going to plateau
pretty soon.
Now, it's plateauing at a very high
number. I mean, you know,
almost 14 million barrels a day and
maybe going a little higher than that.
Others say no technology is going to
unlock the recovery rates now like 7%
and if you can get it to 10 or 12% uh it
will go on longer. So, I think as at
least if we look out a a few decades,
uh the US will continue to be a big
producer of uh
of oil unless something dramatically
changes and a even longer that we have
very abundant gas. Forever, I you know,
things can change, policy can change. Uh
you know, if you have a Bernie Sanders
administration at some day, you know, it
will be a very different picture than uh
what we have today. Again, going back to
the Strait of Hormuz and your book, I
looked up how many times you mentioned
the Strait of Hormuz in The Prize and it
actually wasn't that much. It was like
just four or five times. But then I
looked up how many times you mentioned
Iran
and it's like 500 times. And you know,
Iran is really central to the history of
oil.
What and so you would say the situation
is like very central to our thinking
about oil. What's been most surprising
to you in you know, watching these
events, historic events really, unfold
over the past month or so? What I'm
struck by is the continuity. Uh that the
Iranian oil workers went on strike in
1978 and that was the beginning of the
Iranian Revolution and then
uh the second revolution where the the
the uh uh
you know, the Islamic Islamists captured
the the whole system uh and chanted
death to America. So, in a sense, it's
like this war has been brewing for 47
years. Uh but it does you know, it is
interesting because of course, you know,
oil was discovered in then Persia and
Iran in 1908
and Winston Churchill made the decision
to convert the Royal Navy to uh from
coal to oil and it was going to be
dependent on Iranian oil. And in
Parliament, people were saying, "You're
going to be turned in on Persia. That's
very dangerous." And he came up with uh
well, first of all, he said the prize of
the venture is world mastery itself and
that's where I got the title of the book
from. And then he said the basic axiom
of energy security, which is on variety
in oil
is is variety is this is the source of
safety, diversification. So, that
continues to be the the principle even
though at that point he was making the
Royal Navy very dependent upon Iran,
Persia. But so, it is, you know, how
central Iran has been to the oil story
since 1908. And here it is today, we're
in 2026
and it is still central. It's not the
large producer it was. There was a day
when Iran and Saudi Arabia vied with
each other to be the biggest producer in
OPEC.
But it's its ability to influence what
happens in the entire Gulf and to shut
down the Gulf shows that it's uh
it too has a form of mastery which it
has exerted with drones and missiles.
Yeah, for sure. Um I realized I actually
have one more question, which is are you
also watching Landman, Dan, alongside
Joe?
>> Well, I yeah, I listen, I watched it and
there was that famous episode at the at
the wind turbine Oh, yeah.
the hero got in an argument with the
young lawyer.
>> Yeah, the woke lawyer, that's right,
about how everything, including
everything she was wearing, was made an
oil product.
And I thought that was really
interesting.
But then I stopped watching it and then
I
cuz I
cuz of the subplot got a little, you
know, sidetracked. But I then I started
watching it again. So, now I I I'm not
up there with Joe, but I'm going to
catch up with it cuz you know, I got to
find out how the oil industry really
works and what better way to learn that
than by watching [laughter] Landman. You
need to ask for a cameo, I think.
>> They should. Yeah.
>> in season 3 they really should. You
know, they They a cameo with You know
who has a cameo in it? Who? Is um, the
owner of the Dallas Cowboys. Who like
come There's like a scene where like he
comes in and he talks about
>> people in the oil market.
>> He talks about like the first his first
oil lease or something like he she tells
a story about everything his daughters
went to college and he like paid for it
by like
doing an oil lease like around where
their dorm was or something like I don't
know, it's really good. But I think like
I I am we're putting we're putting this
out there in the world that Taylor
Sheridan Would you put a recommendation
to me? I'd love to have that.
>> We're doing it right now that Taylor
Sheridan needs to have You know what
needs to happen? This is This is
>> of all, Taylor Sheridan also needs to
come on Odd Lots. But this is the scene,
okay? The scene is at CERAWeek and it's
you interviewing the head of M-Tech's
oil on [laughter] cuz that's the the on
that's it's Dan Yergin interviewing the
CEO of M-Tech's oil or what or actually
Billy Bob Thornton. I don't want to give
a spoiler if you if you ever got to the
very end. Maybe you interview Billy Bob
Thornton
>> about expansion plans live on stage.
That would be such a um, what do they
call an Easter egg for oil nerds to see?
>> be great. Yeah, so we're putting that
into the world through this episode of
Odd Lots. Okay, then we're we're then
yes, I'm I'm all on board with it and if
you could just make it happen. We're
This is This is our We're we're try
We'll try.
I I know your show is very influential,
but this is going to demonstrate the
true power of your show. Okay, so we we
actually need to make this happen now.
Okay, um, Dan, that was fantastic as
always. Really appreciate you coming
back on Odd Lots and fingers crossed on
the land man cameo. Thank you. Great to
be on with you both. Thanks a lot and
we'll see how it all unfolds. Joe, that
was very fun. I I really hope you're
going to get like if there's anyone
>> be great, Sue. That'd be really great,
Sue. That would be fantastic. Um,
there's a lot to pick out of there. I
mean, one thing I thought was that was
really interesting just in the context
of geopolitics was the point about the
drones.
>> Yeah. And the idea of like this new
technology being an enabling factor in
allowing like some powers to assert
control over areas that perhaps would
have been much more difficult to assert
control over before. Sometimes when
we're doing episodes, you know, like
I'll like browse on my computer and like
look something up. I meant the Wikipedia
page of the um
uh 2011 Iran-US RQ-170 incident. Do you
know what that is?
>> No. It's when uh Iran captured a
Lockheed Martin RQ-170 Sentinel unmanned
aerial vehicle. Hm. And it is believed
that this is a pivotal moment in being
able to reverse engineer the technology
of that drone.
>> That then became an enabler of the uh
Shahed-191.
>> Hm. You know, this idea it's like are we
seeing like sort of the beta tests for
World War III here? Or beta test for war
starting with Ukraine this this like
incredible leveler of the playing field
or the ability of
a non
you know
>> A non-military powers to inflict
incredible to put up an incredible fight
in some respect. Um you know, that
incident in 2011 could be like sort of
like a key moment in history that
doesn't get enough uh get enough
attention.
Wait, since you're quizzing me on
history
>> Oh, yeah. even though it's recent
which oil company is descended from the
Anglo-Persian
Oil National. I can't remember the exact
name. But Iran's state national oil
company.
What is it now? BP. Yes.
>> Okay. Well, you you gave it away with
Anglo.
>> Didn't I? Yeah. Yeah. Did I say Anglo?
>> You did. You said Anglo. So, there's
like our Alistair from my
>> Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah, I totally gave it
away. I'm going to have to come up with
a better question. All right. All right.
Well, next time. next time. Shall we
leave it there? Let's leave it there.
This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alloway. And I'm
Joe Weisenthal. You can follow me at The
Stalwart. Follow our guest Daniel Yergin
at Daniel Yergin. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dasho
Bennett at Dash Bot, and Kilburgs at
Kilburgs. And for more Odd Lots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odd
lots. And you can chat about all these
topics 24/7 in our discord
discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoyed this
conversation, then please like the video
or leave a comment or better yet
subscribe. Thanks for watching.
>> [music]